Fig. 3: RBPJ knockout improves FOXP3 expression, function and stability in iTreg cells. | Nature | Nature
Skip to main content
Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
and JavaScript.
Advertisement
View all journals
Saved research
Search
Account
Log in
Content
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature
articles
article
figure
Fig. 3: RBPJ knockout improves FOXP3 expression, function and stability in iTreg cells. | Nature
Fig. 3: RBPJ knockout improves FOXP3 expression, function and stability in iTreg cells.
From: Genome-wide CRISPR screen in human T cells reveals regulators of FOXP3
a, Molecular map of genes with previous evidence of involvement in the Notch signalling pathway. Boxes are coloured according to the LFC score from the whole-genome CRISPR screen. b, Comparison of FOXP3 MFI in iTreg cells with the indicated genetic perturbations (n = 4 donors). Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. Statistical analysis was performed with a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. c, Histogram showing FOXP3 expression in iTreg cells treated with ASOs, representative of four independent donors. d, Volcano plot depicting differential genes between RBPJ-knockout and control-edited FOXP3+ iTreg cells as determined by icRNA-seq. The x axis shows the LFC, and the y axis shows −log10 of the adjusted P value calculated using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. e, Heatmap of differentially expressed genes in RBPJ-knockout versus NTC FOXP3+ iTreg cells. f, GSEA of differentially expressed genes between human nTreg cells and Tconv cells. Adjusted P value was determined by a two-sided permutation test. g, Summarized DNA methylation status at each of the 11 CpGs located at the FOXP3 CNS2 locus (n = 4 donors; left), and a representative plot of CNS2 DNA methylation status (right). h, Experimental schematic for modelling iTreg stability in vitro (left), and representative histograms from two independent donors showing FOXP3 stability before and after treatment in NTC or RBPJ-knockout iTreg cells (right). Adapted from ref. 51, Springer Nature America, Inc. i, Summarized data of the experiment in h. Stability was assessed by flow cytometry (n = 6 donors). Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. j, Suppression assay confirms higher suppressive activity in RBPJ-ablated iTreg cells (top). Numbers are indicative of the percentage of dividing cells. A summary of iTreg in vitro suppression experiments with responder CD4+ (bottom left) and CD8+ (bottom right) T cells at the indicated ratios is also shown. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. for three independent donors. PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell.
Source Data
Back to article page
Explore content
Research articles
News
Opinion
Research Analysis
Careers
Books & Culture
Podcasts
Videos
Current issue
Browse issues
Collections
Subjects
Follow us on Facebook
Follow us on Bluesky
Follow us on X
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
About the journal
Journal Staff
About the Editors
Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team
Journal Information
Journal Metrics
Our publishing models
Editorial Values Statement
Editorial policies
Journalistic Principles
History of Nature
Awards
Contact
Send a news tip
Publish with us
For Authors
For Referees
Language editing services
Open access funding
Submit manuscript
Search
Search articles by subject, keyword or author
Show results from
All journals
This journal
Search
Advanced search
Quick links
Explore articles by subject
Find a job
Guide to authors
Editorial policies
Nature
(Nature)
ISSN 1476-4687 (online)
ISSN 0028-0836 (print)
nature.com footer links
About Nature Portfolio
About us
Press releases
Press office
Contact us
Discover content
Journals A-Z
Articles by subject
protocols.io
Nature Index
Publishing policies
Nature portfolio policies
Open access
Author & Researcher services
Reprints & permissions
Research data
Language editing
Scientific editing
Nature Masterclasses
Research Solutions
Libraries & institutions
Librarian service & tools
Librarian portal
Open research
Recommend to library
Advertising & partnerships
Advertising
Partnerships & Services
Media kits
Branded
content
Professional development
Nature Awards
Nature Careers
Nature
Conferences
Regional websites
Nature Africa
Nature China
Nature India
Nature Japan
Nature Middle East
Privacy
Policy
Use
of cookies
Your privacy choices/Manage cookies
Legal
notice
Accessibility
statement
Terms & Conditions
Your US state privacy rights
© 2026 Springer Nature Limited
Close banner
Close
Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.
Email address
Sign up
I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.
Close banner
Close
Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
Sign up for Nature Briefing