@media screen and (min-width: 64em) { div.pmc-wm { background: repeat-y; background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg' width='20' height='350' xmlns:xlink='http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink'%3E%3Cdefs%3E%3Cfilter x='-.02' y='0' width='1.05' height='1' id='c'%3E%3CfeFlood flood-color='%23FFF'/%3E%3CfeComposite in='SourceGraphic'/%3E%3C/filter%3E%3Ctext id='b' font-family='Helvetica' font-size='11pt' style='opacity:1;fill:%23005ea2;stroke:none;text-anchor:middle' x='175' y='14'%3E%3C/text%3E%3Cpath id='a' style='fill:%23005ea2' d='M0 8h350v3H0z'/%3E%3C/defs%3E%3Cuse xlink:href='%23a' transform='rotate(90 10 10)'/%3E%3Cuse xlink:href='%23b' transform='rotate(90 10 10)' filter='url(%23c)'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); padding-left: 3rem; } } Estimating time since influenza virus exposure using single-cell proteomic data - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Primary site navigation Search Logged in as: Dashboard Publications Account settings Log in Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice Front Immunol . 2026 Mar 19;17:1787198. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2026.1787198 Search in PMC Search in PubMed View in NLM Catalog Add to search Estimating time since influenza virus exposure using single-cell proteomic data Klodiana Rizzo Nervo Klodiana Rizzo Nervo 1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft Find articles by Klodiana Rizzo Nervo 1, † , Neda Hajiakhoond Bidoki Neda Hajiakhoond Bidoki 2 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Methodology, Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Investigation Find articles by Neda Hajiakhoond Bidoki 2, † , Han Chen Han Chen 3 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Investigation, Writing – review & editing Find articles by Han Chen 3 , Zainab Rahil Zainab Rahil 3 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Investigation, Writing – review & editing Find articles by Zainab Rahil 3 , Zach Bjornson Zach Bjornson 3 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Writing – review & editing, Investigation Find articles by Zach Bjornson 3 , Kenneth Kim Kenneth Kim 4 Ark Clinical Research, LLC, Long Beach, CA, United States Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Investigation Find articles by Kenneth Kim 4 , Bonnie Bock Bonnie Bock 5 WCCT Global, Cypress, CA, United States Writing – review & editing, Investigation Find articles by Bonnie Bock 5 , Melton Affrime Melton Affrime 5 WCCT Global, Cypress, CA, United States Writing – review & editing, Investigation Find articles by Melton Affrime 5 , Logan Bauerle Logan Bauerle 1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States Writing – review & editing Find articles by Logan Bauerle 1 , Pham Bao Tran Huynh Pham Bao Tran Huynh 1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States Writing – review & editing Find articles by Pham Bao Tran Huynh 1 , David Liebowitz David Liebowitz 6 Vaxart, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States Writing – review & editing Find articles by David Liebowitz 6 , Sean Tucker Sean Tucker 6 Vaxart, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing Find articles by Sean Tucker 6 , Pier Federico Gherardini Pier Federico Gherardini 7 Department of Biology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy Methodology, Writing – review & editing Find articles by Pier Federico Gherardini 7 , Garry P Nolan Garry P Nolan 8 Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Investigation Find articles by Garry P Nolan 8 , Nima Aghaeepour Nima Aghaeepour 2 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Writing – original draft, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Supervision Find articles by Nima Aghaeepour 2, ‡ , David R McIlwain David R McIlwain 1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft Find articles by David R McIlwain 1, *, ‡ Author information Article notes Copyright and License information 1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States 2 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States 3 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States 4 Ark Clinical Research, LLC, Long Beach, CA, United States 5 WCCT Global, Cypress, CA, United States 6 Vaxart, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States 7 Department of Biology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy 8 Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States * Correspondence: David R. McIlwain, davidmcilwain@unr.edu † These authors have contributed equally to this work ‡ These authors share senior authorship Roles Klodiana Rizzo Nervo : Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft Neda Hajiakhoond Bidoki : Methodology, Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Investigation Han Chen : Investigation, Writing – review & editing Zainab Rahil : Investigation, Writing – review & editing Zach Bjornson : Writing – review & editing, Investigation Kenneth Kim : Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Investigation Bonnie Bock : Writing – review & editing, Investigation Melton Affrime : Writing – review & editing, Investigation Logan Bauerle : Writing – review & editing Pham Bao Tran Huynh : Writing – review & editing David Liebowitz : Writing – review & editing Sean Tucker : Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing Pier Federico Gherardini : Methodology, Writing – review & editing Garry P Nolan : Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Investigation Nima Aghaeepour : Writing – original draft, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Supervision David R McIlwain : Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft Received 2026 Jan 13; Accepted 2026 Feb 23; Revised 2026 Feb 13; Collection date 2026. Copyright © 2026 Rizzo Nervo, Hajiakhoond Bidoki, Chen, Rahil, Bjornson, Kim, Bock, Affrime, Bauerle, Huynh, Liebowitz, Tucker, Gherardini, Nolan, Aghaeepour and McIlwain. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC13044454 PMID: 41939909 Abstract Introduction Determining when the onset of a respiratory infection occurred is important for effective clinical management and can aid in mapping transmission events. However, current diagnostic assays report only pathogen detection status and do not provide any information about the timing of infection, in part because of the lack of biomarkers that inform time since exposure. Methods To address this gap, we developed immune-based predictive models of infection timing and shedding status using data from a controlled human challenge with influenza A/California/2009 (H1N1), in which major immune cell subsets were longitudinally profiled across multiple time points before and after viral challenge using 42-marker mass cytometry panels. Random forest machine learning models were trained to address two predictive objectives: (1) distinguishing virus shedders from non-shedders and (2) estimating days post-infection challenge (DPC) from immune profiles. Model performance was evaluated within the primary challenge cohort and independently validated using data from a separate controlled human influenza challenge study using the same virus. Results Our analysis revealed that single-cell immune population dynamics alone encode a robust and reproducible temporal structure following influenza infection, enabling accurate estimation of virus exposure timing. Discussion These findings provide foundational insight into host immune responses during influenza infection and represent an early step toward a future class of immune-based diagnostics that could extend beyond pathogen detection to inform infection timing and the duration of periods associated with contagiousness. Keywords: controlled human virus challenge, influenza A (H1N1), machine learning, mass cytometry (CyTOF), random forest models Introduction Influenza viruses pose a continual threat to public health by causing significant seasonal and pandemic respiratory diseases. In the United States alone, annual epidemics are estimated to cause 9–49 million infections, 140,000-710,000 hospitalizations, and 12,000-79,000 deaths each year ( 1 ). Worldwide, the catastrophic 1918 outbreak underscores the virus’s ability for rapid spread, severe morbidity, and large-scale mortality ( 2 ). Despite widespread vaccination efforts and the availability of antiviral therapies, influenza continues to exert a substantial and recurring health and economic burden. Existing diagnostics for influenza and other respiratory infections rely primarily on rapid antigen detection assays and nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), such as reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Rapid antigen tests are inexpensive and offer near-immediate results but suffer from limited sensitivity. NAATs provide superior sensitivity and specificity but typically require more time, cost, and laboratory infrastructure ( 3 ). Clinically, both testing modalities generally offer only a binary readout of viral presence but reveal no information on when the infection began or how long an individual may remain infectious ( 4 ). As a result, clinicians and public authorities lack actionable tools to estimate infectious duration or guide time-sensitive decisions related to treatment, isolation, and contact tracing. Controlled human challenge studies offer an ideal context to identify factors capable of estimating time since infection (TSI) because exposure timing is precisely defined. Prior efforts to estimate TSI have primarily focused on host transcriptional responses measured in controlled human challenge settings. Longitudinal gene expression signatures derived from influenza A (H1N1, H3N2), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and human rhinovirus (HRV) challenge studies have been shown to accurately infer timing of influenza exposure ( 5 ). Whole-blood transcriptomic analyses from individuals challenged with HRV, RSV, H1N1, and H3N2 have also identified early biomarkers that discriminate uninfected controls from individuals who subsequently become viral shedders within the first 32 hours post-infection ( 6 ). Additional studies have demonstrated distinct temporal transcriptional dynamics associated with asymptomatic versus symptomatic influenza A infection ( 7 ). Similar transcriptomic approaches applied to COVID-19 cohorts have successfully predicted both viral shedding status and stage of infection ( 8 ). Serological approaches have likewise been used to estimate infection recency beyond the acute phase ( 9 ). While prior studies make it clear that peripheral blood contains temporal information, there remains a lack of studies leveraging single-cell data to estimate TSI for respiratory infections. Circulating cellular immune responses can capture coordinated changes across multiple immune compartments during infection and may provide a more direct path for identifying a minimal feature set needed for robust time since infection inference. High-dimensional single-cell technologies, such as mass cytometry, also known as cytometry by time-of-flight (CyTOF), enable detailed characterization of immune system dynamics across infection stages by simultaneously measuring dozens of protein markers at the single-cell level. Mass cytometry has become a powerful tool to study infectious disease and vaccine immunology, offering the resolution needed to capture nuanced shifts in cellular immunity across multiple infection and vaccination contexts, including severe acute respiratory syndrome SARS-CoV-2, influenza A, dengue, Ebola, and others ( 10 – 16 ). In this study, we analyzed peripheral blood samples from healthy adults challenged with influenza A/California/2009 (H1N1) using 42-marker mass cytometry panels to profile immune cell subsets before and after infection. We applied random forest machine learning models to classify subjects as virus shedders or non-shedders and to predict days post-infection challenge (DPC) from immune profiles, with model generalizability evaluated in an independent challenge cohort receiving the same influenza challenge virus. We demonstrate that high-dimensional single-cell immune population dynamics alone encode a robust and reproducible temporal signal following influenza infection, enabling accurate inference of infection timing across independent controlled human challenge studies. These results lay the groundwork for potential future diagnostic approaches capable of detecting infection and estimating when it began, and by extension, how long infectiousness may persist. Materials and methods Mass cytometry and clinical cohorts Mass cytometry data were retrospectively analyzed from two independent controlled human influenza challenge studies, referred to as Study A and Study B, both of which used the same A/California/2009 (H1N1) challenge strain ( 17 ). For Study A ( 11 ), data were analyzed from 35 volunteers with samples collected at baseline and on days 1–7 post-challenge (DPC). Volunteers were classified as non-shedders (n = 19) or viral shedders (n = 16), indicating having two or more positive nasopharyngeal swab (qRT-PCR) measurements of viral RNA. For Study B ( 18 ), data were analyzed from 31 volunteers selected to provide a cohort comparable to Study A with respect to sampling timepoints and viral shedding status. This cohort included 15 non-shedders and16 shedders and, with representation across the three study treatment arms. Viral shedding status was determined in the original study using nasopharyngeal swab qRT-PCR data and was used as reported here. Samples were collected between days 1 and 7 DPC; however, the study design did not include collection at DPC4 or DPC6, and DPC7 samples were not collected for non-shedders or for four shedders. Mass cytometry was performed on venipuncture whole blood samples that were fixed and cryopreserved using Smart Tube Proteomic Stabilizer. A consistent workflow for staining, data acquisition, and data processing was applied across both studies. Detailed descriptions of the experimental workflow and antibody staining panels used for each study have been published previously ( 11 , 12 ). Input data for machine learning consisted of mass cytometry measurements from the Study A and Study B cohorts. Collection day variables were standardized by converting study-specific day numbering schemes into a unified scale relative to viral challenge (DPC). Normalization Cell population abundances from mass cytometry were calculated as frequencies of total mononuclear cells, as previously described ( 11 , 12 ). To reduce noise associated with inter-individual variability, immune features were baseline-normalized by subtracting each participant’s pre-challenge values from post-challenge measurements. Two datasets were generated: baseline-normalized and not-normalized (raw). Both were analyzed using identical modeling pipelines, and model performance for viral shedding classification and time-since-infection prediction was compared to assess the impact of normalization. Classification model For the binary classification task of distinguishing virus shedders from non-shedders, we implemented a random forest classifier ( 19 ). Within Study A, models were trained and validated both at individual DPC and across all days combined. Performance was evaluated using a 5-fold cross-validation strategy, in which folds were stratified by subject ID to ensure that all samples from a given participant were assigned exclusively to either the training or validation set. This design prevented information leakage across datasets and avoided artificially inflated performance estimates. The choice for five-folds was empirical and reflected a balance between computational efficiency and effective control over model bias and variance. To further strengthen robustness, the full cross-validation procedure was repeated one hundred times, and performance metrics were averaged across repetitions. Classification performance was summarized by the mean and standard deviation of key evaluation indicators, including receiver operating characteristics (ROC) and corresponding area under the curve (AUC) values. To ensure computational reproducibility, the random state of the random forest models was controlled using a fixed seed. For external validation, models trained using Study A data were applied directly to the independent Study B cohort using the same feature set and preprocessing pipeline. No cross-validation was performed within Study B. Classification performance metrics were computed from predictions on Study B samples to enable direct comparison of model generalizability across cohorts. Receiver operating characteristics Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves were generated to evaluate the performance of the random forest classifier in distinguishing virus shedders from non-shedders. ROC curves were constructed by plotting the true positive rate (sensitivity) against the false positive rate (1 – specificity) at varying classification thresholds. Sensitivity was calculated as TP/(TP + FN), and specificity as TN/(TN + FP). The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was computed as a scalar measure of the classifier’s discriminatory performance, ranging from 0 (no discrimination) to 1 (perfect discrimination). ROC curves and AUC values were calculated using the scikit-learn Python library. Analyses were performed for each individual day post-infection as well as across all days combined. ROC/AUC metrics were also used to compare model performance with and without baseline normalization, allowing assessment of the contribution of normalization and immune feature dynamics to shedding classification. Regression model To estimate the DPC at which each blood sample was collected, we trained a random forest regression model using immune cell population features from Study A. Model performance within Study A was evaluated using a leave-one-subject-out (LOSO) cross-validation strategy. In each fold, all samples from one participant across all available time points were held out, and predictions were generated for that participant’s samples using a model trained on all remaining participants. This approach ensured that each evaluation was performed on entirely unseen individuals, preventing data leakage and providing a realistic assessment of subject-level generalizability. Predictions from all LOSO folds were pooled to quantify overall model performance. Model generalizability was then assessed using an independent external validation cohort (Study B). In this setting, the random forest model was trained once using all available samples from Study A and applied directly to Study B samples to generate predicted DPC values. No cross-validation was performed in Study B. Predicted DPC values were summarized as median trends with 95% confidence intervals. Model accuracy was quantified using Pearson correlation coefficients (r) and associated p-values to assess agreement between predicted and actual sampling days. Regression model prediction correlation Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) was used to assess the linear association between the regression model’s predicted values and the observed post-challenge time points. Correlation analyses were performed in Python using the pearsonr() function from the scipy.stats module, which provides both the correlation coefficient and a two-tailed p-value testing the null hypothesis of no correlation. Pearson correlation was used as a descriptive measure of agreement between predicted and observed DPC values to assess recovery of temporal structure along the infection timeline, rather than parametric assumption testing about the underlying data distributions. Root mean square error Root Mean Square Error (rMSE) was used to quantify prediction accuracy in the random forest regression models. rMSE measures the average magnitude of prediction errors between the model’s predicted time post-infection and the actual time points of sample collection. rMSE was defined as follows, where yi are observed values and ŷi are predicted values: r M S E = 1 n ∑ i = 1 n ( y i − y ^ i ) 2 In this study, rMSE was calculated in two ways. First, rMSE was computed separately for each day post-challenge (DPC) using only samples collected at that time point, allowing prediction accuracy to be compared across stages of infection. Second, an overall rMSE was computed by pooling all predictions across DPCs and calculating a single rMSE, equivalent to averaging the squared prediction errors across all samples before taking the square root. rMSE calculations were implemented in Python using NumPy by computing the square root of the mean squared difference between predicted and observed values, excluding non-finite entries. Correlation network analysis Correlation networks were constructed to visualize univariate immune cell population feature importance and to contextualize these features based on cell population identity and similarity to other cell populations. Nodes represent gated immune cell populations, with node diameter encoding scaled univariate feature importance. Edges connect populations with similar phenotypic marker expression (Spearman ρ ≥ 0.7). Spearman correlation was used as a non-parametric measure to reduce sensitivity to non-normal distributions and outliers. Nodes were embedded in two dimensions using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) to cluster populations with similar phenotypic marker expression profiles. Nodes were also colored by cell population category. Univariate feature importance was quantified by the correlation between normalized population abundance and sampling day, summarized as -log10(p) or R² values, which were normalized for visualization and used to scale node diameter. Larger diameter nodes therefore indicate immune populations with relatively stronger infection- or time-associated patterns. Trajectory visualization by UMAP Longitudinal immune cell trajectories were visualized using uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) applied to immune cell frequency data across all samples and participants. Prior to dimensionality reduction, immune cell frequencies were normalized across samples to place features on a comparable scale. UMAP was then performed on the resulting feature matrix to embed samples into two dimensions, with UMAP1-UMAP2 coordinates reflecting similarity in immune cell frequency composition. Each sample was represented as a single point. The position of points in 2D space is dictated solely by immune cell frequency features and is independent of days post-challenge (DPC). After UMAP embedding, samples were colored by either actual or model-predicted DPC for visualization. The trajectory line traces the central tendency of samples across DPC for visualization purposes, with bold numbers marking each DPC. Software All analyses were performed in Python using the pandas, NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn, and scikit-learn libraries ( 20 , 21 ), as commonly adopted in other single-cell studies ( 22 ). Results Study design The objective of this study was to determine whether integrated immune cell responses quantified by mass cytometry could be used in a machine learning framework to predict the timing of influenza virus infection. To achieve this, we analyzed data from two controlled human challenge studies using the same influenza A/California/2009 (H1N1) strain, described below. Use of an identical challenge strain and closely aligned experimental protocols across studies provided a consistent experimental context with respect to viral genetics and exposure conditions for evaluating temporal immune dynamics. Together, these cohorts provided complementary datasets for training and validating predictive models of infection dynamics ( Figure 1 ). Figure 1. Open in a new tab Study design and workflow for the prediction of virus shedding and time post-virus exposure. Blood samples were collected from volunteers before and after intranasal challenge with A/California/2009 (H1N1) virus as part of two independent studies. For Study A ( 11 ) and Study B ( 12 ), samples were analyzed from pre-challenge baseline days together with samples from up to 7 days post-challenge (DPC). Viral titers were measured by qRT-PCR in nasopharyngeal swabs to determine viral shedding status. For study A, virus challenge resulted in n=19 virus shedders and n=16 virus non-shedders. Study B samples were analyzed from n=16 shedders and n=15 non-shedders spread across treatment arms. Samples were analyzed by mass cytometry to identify immune cell subsets. Cell subset abundances were used as features to generate random forest machine learning models for the classification of viral shedding status and the prediction of DPC. Models built entirely using Study A train/test sets were subsequently independently validated using data from Study B. Study A ( 11 ) enrolled 35 healthy adults who were intranasally inoculated with a standardized dose of A/California/2009 (H1N1), delivered by atomizer, and were intensively monitored during screening, confinement, and the post-challenge follow-up. Peripheral blood samples were collected daily until the seventh day post challenge (DPC), including two pre-challenge baseline samples. Participants were classified as virus shedders or non-shedders based on quantitative RT-PCR results from nasal swabs and supporting clinical assessments. Study B ( 12 , 18 ), was a clinical trial assessing the investigational oral influenza vaccine from Vaxart (VXA-A1.1) alongside a marketed vaccine and placebo control. These individuals were challenged with the same A/California/2009 (H1N1) strain under conditions aligned with study A. Peripheral blood samples were similarly collected across the course of infection, and shedder status was assigned using equivalent criteria applied in Study A. Immune profiling by mass cytometry Mass cytometry was performed using 42-antibody panels to identify and quantify immune cell populations in peripheral blood samples collected from both studies. Manual gating resolved 37 immune cell populations ( Supplementary Table 1 ), that reliably matched across both studies at consistent DPC and were used for modeling ( Supplementary Table 2 ). These included major subsets of monocytes, granulocytes, B-cell, T-cell, and NK-cells. The full mass cytometry datasets from each study used as model inputs are provided in Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Table 4 . Prior analyses of the Study A dataset showed that these immune profiles resolved distinct immune response patterns between virus shedders and non-shedders ( 11 ). Several immune populations displayed distinct population-specific temporal patterns following viral challenge ( Figure 2 ). Classical monocytes (cMCs) and intermediate monocytes (intMCs) peaked around DPC 3 in shedders, with intMCs reaching maximum abundance slightly later on DPC 4. Nonclassical monocytes (ncMCs) increased until DPC 5 before declining. Basophils, defined as CD123 + HLA-DR − cells, decreased sharply in shedders. Activated and proliferating lymphocytes, including CD4 + T cells (CD38 + Ki67 + ), CD8 + memory T cells (CD38 + Ki67 + ), and NK cells (CD56 lo CD16 + CD38 + Ki67 + ), increased steadily in shedders through DPC 7. Class-switched memory B cells declined for shedders reaching nadirs at day 4 or 5. In contrast, non-shedders maintained relatively stable immune cell frequencies across most populations. Figure 2. Open in a new tab Post-challenge immune population kinetics in viral shedders align across studies. Relative abundances of indicated immune cell populations across baseline (BL) and day post-infection challenge (DPC). Classical monocytes (cMCs)(CD14+CD16-), intermediate monocytes (intMC)(CD14+CD16+), non-classical monocytes (ncMC)(CD16+CD14-), basophil (CD123+HLA-DR–), activated proliferating CD4 T cells (CD4+CD38+Ki67+), activated proliferating CD8+ Memory T cells (CD8+ CD45RA-CD38+ Ki67+), activated proliferating NK cells (CD56 loCD16+ CD38+ Ki67+), class-switched memory B cells (B cells CSM) (IgM-CD27+). For gating, see Rahil et al. and McIlwain and Chen et al. ( 11 , 12 ). Values show relative abundance (% of mononuclear CD66- cells normalized by subtraction of baseline); filled squares and solid lines indicate virus shedders, and open squares and dashed lines indicate virus non-shedders. Green lines show samples from Study A (n=19 shedders, n=16 non-shedders), purple lines show samples from Study B (n=16 shedders, n=15 non-shedders). Plotted values are mean frequency +/- SEM. These coordinated and resolved changes in immune cell abundances over time reveal a clear trajectory of immune cell mobilization and contraction during influenza infection. The strong temporal structure of these immune responses suggests that peripheral immune profiles may encode sufficient information to infer the presence of infection and infection timing. Predicting viral shedding status with machine learning To determine whether immune profiles could reliably distinguish infection outcomes, we trained random forest classifiers to differentiate virus shedders from non-shedders using baseline-normalized data. The models were trained and validated independently at each study day in both Study A and Study B. Furthermore, we used a bootstrapping strategy combined with five-fold cross-validation to account for the modest sample size and ensure robust performance estimates. The classifiers achieved consistent predictive accuracy across multiple time points, with area-under-the-curve (AUC) values summarized in Figures 3A, B . Models trained on Study A data generalized to the independent Study B cohort with cross-cohort AUC values ranging from 0.50 to 0.81 across time points, indicating that peripheral immune signatures contain sufficient discriminatory power to classify viral shedding status following influenza challenge. In the absence of baseline normalization, models exhibited reduced overall predictive performance, indicating that anchoring immune features to each participant’s pre-challenge baseline is critical for amplifying infection-related immune signals ( Supplementary Figures 1A, B ). Figure 3. Open in a new tab Random forest model effectively classifies virus shedding across studies. (A, B) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves evaluating the performance of random forest models built using baseline-normalized data to classify virus shedders from non-shedders. Lines and AUC values show model performance at the indicated DPCs. (A) Model trained and validated on Study (A, B) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort. (C, D) Correlation networks used to visualize and contextualize univariate immune population feature importance for Study A (C) and Study B (D), where nodes represent gated immune cell populations, and edges indicate similarity in phenotypic marker expression between populations. Univariate importance scores (–log10(p)) for distinguishing virus shedders from non-shedders are projected onto the network and scale node size, with larger nodes indicating stronger predictive importance. Networks contextualize the identity of immune cell populations and their relative importance to the classification models. To investigate the contribution of individual immune cell populations to model performance, we constructed network visualizations that highlight relationships among cell populations based on phenotypic marker expression ( Figures 3C, D ). Feature importance analyses indicated contributions from both innate and adaptive immune cell populations across studies, with NK cell and granulocyte subsets among the most consistently informative. These results demonstrate that integrated immune cell population data provides a robust framework for distinguishing likely infection outcomes across independent human challenge studies. Predicting time since infection onset with machine learning We next evaluated whether immune cell dynamics could be leveraged to infer the time since infection onset in viral shedders. Using Study A data, random forest regression models with one hundred estimators were trained using repeated stratified five-fold cross-validation (100 iterations), in which each iteration excluded one participant for testing while the model was trained on the remaining subjects. Both baseline-normalized and raw abundance data were analyzed to determine the effect of normalization on model performance, based on the expectation that incorporating each individual’s baseline immune profile would reduce biological variability and improve predictive accuracy. For Study A, predicted DPC showed a strong correlation with actual DPC for viral shedders (r = 0.92, p-value = 5.87e − 53 for normalized data; r = 0.70, p-value = 4.19e -20 for unnormalized data), as illustrated in Figure 4A and in Supplementary Figures 2A, B . Overall prediction error (rMSE, in days) was 1.060 for the Study A normalized model and 1.490 for the Study A unnormalized model. Predictions also generalized effectively by applying the model to the independent Study B cohort, yielding a robust correlation between predicted and actual DPC for viral shedders (r = 0.78, p-value = 5.04e − 17 for normalized data; r = 0.57, p-value = 8.61e -8 for unnormalized data), as displayed in Figure 4B and in Supplementary Figures 2C, D . Corresponding overall rMSE values in Study B were 1.483 (normalized) and 1.490 (unnormalized). Attempts to model temporal trajectories in non-shedders did not produce meaningful temporal predictions, consistent with the absence of sustained infection-driven immune perturbation in these individuals ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Taken together, these results indicate that immune cell dynamics contain a measurable temporal signal that can be decoded to estimate time since infection, and that anchoring each participant’s data to their own baseline substantially enhances the stability and the accuracy of these estimates. Figure 4. Open in a new tab Machine learning–based prediction of time post virus exposure. (A, B) Random forest models predicting time post virus exposure in virus shedders using baseline-normalized data. (A) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.92, p = 5.87 × 10 −53 , n = 19) with corresponding root mean squared error (rMSE). (B) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.78, p = 5.04 × 10 −17 , n = 16) with rMSE shown. (C, D) UMAP projections visualizing immune state trajectories over time and colored by actual or predicted DPC. UMAP projections of longitudinal immune cell frequencies from Study A (C) and Study B (D) , illustrating trajectories from baseline through peak infection and toward resolution; legends indicate whether color scale displays actual or model-predicted DPC, which show strong concordance. Each point represents a single sample embedded based on immune cell frequency features only (independent of DPC). Point colors are applied after UMAP embedding and do not influence the UMAP coordinates. The trajectory line traces the central tendency of samples across DPC, with bold numbers marking each DPC. (E, F) Heatmaps comparing predicted versus actual DPC by subject for Study A (E) and Study B (F) , demonstrating accurate temporal inference and generalization to an independent cohort. To examine the evolution of immune cell trajectories over the course of infection, we visualized all samples from all participants using uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) built based on immune cell frequency data ( Figures 4C, D ). Here each point represents a sample, with UMAP1-UMAP2 coordinates reflecting global similarity in immune cell frequency composition. In both Studies A and B, samples followed an elliptical trajectory in UMAP space, with peak viral load timepoints located furthest from baseline. This pattern is consistent with a coordinated progression from infection onset through maximal immune activation and subsequent recovery. Points were colored by either actual or model-predicted days post-challenge (DPC). In both cases, samples with similar DPC clustered together along the UMAP trajectory, demonstrating close agreement between predicted timing and observed immune cell dynamics. Model performance was further examined by comparing predicted versus actual DPC for each participant across each study ( Figures 4E, F ). The resulting heatmaps display accurate temporal ranking across individuals and timepoints. Equivalent heatmaps generated using unnormalized data showed reduced consistency, reinforcing the advantage of baseline-normalization ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). Lastly, to explore cellular features driving temporal predictions, we applied the same network-based approach used for the classifier analyses. Networks depicting relationships among immune cell populations based on phenotypic marker expression were overlaid with univariate feature importance scores for days post-challenge (DPC) prediction ( Figures 5A, B ). Node size was scaled by the strength of each population’s association with time, as measured by Spearman correlation values, highlighting features with the strongest temporal relationships. To directly compare feature importance across studies, a scatter plot was used to visualize head-to-head rankings between models ( Figure 5C ). Immune populations consistently ranked among the most informative in both studies included activated and proliferating T cell and NK cell subsets ( Figure 5C ), consistent with their well-characterized expansion and activation dynamics during acute respiratory infection. Figure 5. Open in a new tab Network-based analysis of immune cell population importance for the prediction of time post virus exposure. (A, B) Correlation networks used to visualize and contextualize univariate immune population feature importance for Study A (A) and Study B (B) , where nodes represent gated immune cell populations, and edges indicate similarity in phenotypic marker expression between populations. Univariate importance scores (R²) for predicting DPC are projected onto the network and scale node size, with larger diameter nodes indicating stronger temporal predictive importance. Networks contextualize immune cell population identity and their relative importance to the predictive models. (C) Scatter plot for comparison of univariate model importance scores between Study A and Study B, where each point represents a cell population positioned according to its ranked importance in the two cohorts. Highly informative populations are highlighted, demonstrating consistent contributions of activated and proliferating T cell, T cell memory, and NK cells subsets to temporal prediction across studies. Collectively, these results suggest that temporal variations in immune cell populations encode a measurable and reproducible signal of infection timing, enabling reliable estimation of time since exposure across independent controlled human influenza challenge studies. Discussion We applied machine learning to high-dimensional immune profiling data from two controlled human influenza challenge studies to demonstrate that circulating immune cell dynamics contain predictive information about infection stage. Immune population trajectories not only distinguished viral shedders from non-shedders but also enabled accurate prediction of time since infection challenge. Random forest models trained in one cohort generalized to an independent challenge study, underscoring the robustness and reproducibility of the temporal immune signatures identified under controlled experimental conditions. Together, these findings establish single-cell immune population dynamics as an independent and previously underexplored modality for infection staging. Previous work has shown that respiratory viral infection stage can be inferred from blood-based biomarker data through transcriptional and serological profiling ( 5 – 9 ). Our results complement this body of work by demonstrating that single-cell immune phenotyping alone, without transcriptomic or serological data, captures temporal patterns of infection at high resolution. These findings indicate that cellular immune dynamics represent an underexplored source of biological information for infection staging. Future translation of these insights toward practical diagnostics will likely depend on identifying a minimal set of temporally informative cellular features that can be measured using scalable, lower-complexity platforms more suitable than mass cytometry. Integrating measurement of such features with existing molecular diagnostic modalities could substantially improve clinical decision-making by providing estimates of infection status and timing, enabling more precise guidance on treatment interventions. Because the temporal relationship between time since exposure and viral shedding has been characterized for influenza, accurate estimation of time since infection alone may provide an indirect framework to improve estimates of expected shedding windows. Whether similar immune-cell–based models could be developed in studies with larger cohorts and more precisely resolved longitudinal shedding measurements to directly predict the duration of viral shedding warrants investigation in future work. Identifying circulating immune cell responses predictive of atypical prolonged viral shedding in community-acquired respiratory viral infection would be particularly valuable. In this study, model performance benefited from normalization to individual pre-challenge immune baselines, highlighting a dependency on baseline measurements for optimal temporal inference. Although this requirement could pose practical challenges for deployment, it also underscores the broader value of establishing individual immune baselines for interpreting immune perturbations, which may prove relevant across multiple healthcare contexts, including infection, vaccination, and other inflammatory or physiological stressors ( 23 ). As longitudinal immune profiling becomes more feasible, baseline-referenced models may support more precise interpretation of immune state changes. Influenza A viruses evolve through antigenic drift and, less frequently, antigenic shift, with prominent variation in the surface glycoproteins hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Viral genetic differences can alter replication kinetics, host immunity, and the timing and magnitude of inflammatory and cellular responses ( 2 ). An important limitation of our study is that models were trained and validated using two studies conducted with a single A/California/2009 (H1N1) challenge strain; the extent to which the same immune features and learned mappings generalize to antigenically distinct strains remains uncertain. Contemporary influenza A controlled human infection models have largely focused on H1N1 and H3N2 challenge strains ( 24 ), reflecting practical and ethical constraints on human challenge-strain development and use. An important next step is to evaluate performance across additional controlled influenza challenge strains; matched multi-strain challenge cohorts would enable a direct test of model generalizability. Furthermore, because this analysis was performed in controlled human influenza challenge studies with precisely defined exposure timing and standardized infection conditions, additional work would be required to evaluate how immune-cell-based temporal inference models perform in community-acquired influenza settings. In natural infection contexts, greater variability in viral genetics, infectious dose, and host population characteristics may influence immune response trajectories, while less uniform clinical sampling schedules may introduce additional noise. Cohort sizes in the present study were modest, constraining model complexity and limiting power to detect subtler cellular features. Future studies in larger and more diverse populations that span broader influenza strain diversity and reflect real-world, less uniform community sampling will be essential to evaluate generalizability and to develop more comprehensive temporal prediction models that remain robust to evolving influenza viruses. In summary, this study demonstrates that coordinated changes in circulating immune cell populations encode measurable information about infection timing that can be extracted using high-dimensional phenotyping coupled with machine learning. Across two independent controlled human influenza challenge studies, these immune dynamics supported accurate inference of infection stage and generalized across cohorts challenged with the same viral strain. Together, these findings establish a benchmark for immune-based temporal inference under well-defined experimental conditions and provide a foundation for future studies evaluating the performance of such approaches in more heterogeneous, community-acquired infection settings. Funding Statement The author(s) declared that financial support was received for this work and/or its publication. This work was supported in part by US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, and Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (contract number HHSO100201500034C); US NIH Cooperative Centers for Translational Research in Human Immunology and Biodefense Opportunity Fund seed grant; US Food and Drug Administration Medical Countermeasures Initiative contracts 75F40120C00176 and HHSF223201610018C. This article reflects the views of the authors and should not be construed as representing the views or policies of HHS agencies or other groups and companies providing funding or affiliated with the authors. Footnotes Edited by: Julie Olson , University of Minnesota Twin Cities, United States Reviewed by: Aruna Pal , West Bengal University of Animal and Fishery Sciences, India LaToya Richards Montgomery Richards , Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, United States Data availability statement The datasets used for model building in this study are available in Supplementary Tables 3 and 4 . Code used in this study is available from Github ( https://github.com/davemcilwain/Flu-Day-Prediction ). Ethics statement This study involves retrospective analysis of data derived from previously reported clinical trials and does not itself constitute human subjects research. The source studies have been described previously by Rahil et al. ( 11 ) and Liebowitz et al. ( 18 ), with trial details available on ClinicalTrials.gov under identifiers NCT04106817 and NCT02918006 . Both studies were conducted with written informed consent from participants, were approved by institutional review boards with data and safety monitoring board oversight. Author contributions KR: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. NH: Methodology, Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Investigation. HC: Investigation, Writing – review & editing. ZR: Investigation, Writing – review & editing. ZB: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. KK: Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Investigation. BB: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. MA: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. LB: Writing – review & editing. PH: Writing – review & editing. DL: Writing – review & editing. ST: Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. PG: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. GN: Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Investigation. NA: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Supervision. DM: Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. Conflict of interest KK was employed by company Ark Clinical Research, LLC. DL, ST are current or former employees of Vaxart Inc. MA, BB and KK are former employees of WCCT Global. The remaining author(s) declared that this work was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The authors declare that this work received funding from Vaxart Inc (Vaxart/Stanford sponsored research agreement #137364). The funder was involved in investigation, methodology, and writing/review and editing. Generative AI statement The author(s) declared that generative AI was not used in the creation of this manuscript. Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us. Publisher’s note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2026.1787198/full#supplementary-material Supplementary Figure 1 Random forest model classifying virus shedding across studies without baseline normalization. ROC curves evaluating the performance of random forest models built using raw, not-normalized data to classify virus shedders from non-shedders. Lines and AUC values show model performance at the indicated DPCs. (A) Model trained and validated on Study A. (B) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort. Results illustrate reduced overall classification accuracy and generalization compared to baseline-normalized models shown in Figure 3 . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Figure 2 Machine learning–based prediction of time post virus exposure without baseline normalization. (A–D) Random forest models predicting time post virus exposure in virus shedders using raw, not-normalized data. (A, B) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.70, p = 4.19 × 10 −20 , n = 19) with corresponding root mean squared error (rMSE). (C, D) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.57, p = 8.61 × 10 − 8 , n = 16) with rMSE shown. Results illustrate reduced temporal accuracy and generalization compared to baseline-normalized models shown in Figure 4 . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Figure 3 Expected absence of predictive temporal immune trajectories in non-shedders. Random forest models predicting time post virus exposure in non-shedders. (A–D) Models built using baseline-normalized data. (A) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.45, p = 1.26 × 10 −7 , n = 16) with corresponding root mean squared error (rMSE) shown in (B) . (C) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.17, p = 1.93 × 10 − ¹, n = 15) with rMSE shown in (D) . (E–H) Models built using raw, not-normalized data. (E) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.27, p = 2.13 × 10 − ³, n = 16) with rMSE shown in (F) . (G) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.01, p = 9.14 × 10 − ¹, n = 15) with rMSE shown in (H) . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Figure 4 Predicted versus actual DPC without baseline normalization. (A, B ) Heatmaps comparing predicted versus actual DPC by subject for Study A (A) and Study B (B) using raw, non-normalized data. Each tile represents the median predicted DPC for a given subject relative to the actual DPC, illustrating reduced temporal accuracy and generalization compared to baseline-normalized models shown in Figure 4 . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Table 1 Mapping of immune cell populations between study A and study B. Columns list cell populations from each study dataset, with corresponding or equivalent subpopulations aligned within the same row. DataSheet1.csv (1.5KB, csv) Supplementary Table 2 Alignment of sampling timepoints between study A and study B. The DPC (days post-challenge) column indicates the unified timepoint alignment used in this study. The Study A and Study B columns list the original study-specific day numbering schemes reported in ( 11 ) and ( 12 ) respectively. For Study A, viral challenge occurred on study day 1 (original numbering) following blood draw sampling. For Study B, viral challenge occurred on study day 90 (original numbering) following blood draw sampling. For both studies, the DPC 1 blood draw corresponds to approximately 24 hours post-challenge. DataSheet2.csv (106B, csv) Supplementary Table 3 Study A immune cell abundance data used for model features. Columns include volunteer identifier (VOLUNTEER), day post-challenge of blood draw (DPC), and virus shedding status (SHEDDER), encoded as 1 for shedders and 0 for non-shedders, for participants in Study A. Remaining columns report the relative abundances of immune cell populations measured by mass cytometry and used as model features. DataSheet3.csv (194.6KB, csv) Supplementary Table 4 Study B immune cell abundance data used for model features. Columns include volunteer identifier (VOLUNTEER), day post-challenge of blood draw (DPC), and virus shedding status (SHEDDER), encoded as 1 for shedders and 0 for non-shedders, for participants in Study B. Remaining columns report the relative abundances of immune cell populations measured by mass cytometry and used as model features. DataSheet4.csv (98.9KB, csv) References 1. CDC . Flu Burden (2024). Available online at: https://www.cdc.gov/flu-burden/php/about/index.html . About Estimated Flu Burden (Accessed December 10, 2025). 2. Krammer F, Smith GJD, Fouchier RAM, Peiris M, Kedzierska K, Doherty PC, et al. Influenza. Nat Rev Dis Primers. (2018) 4:3. doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 3. Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS, Englund JA, File TM, Fry AM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the infectious diseases society of america: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional outbreak management of seasonal influenzaa. Clin Infect Dis. (2019) 68:e1–47. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciy866, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 4. McIlwain DR, Chen H, Apkarian M, Affrime M, Bock B, Kim K, et al. Performance of BioFire array or QuickVue influenza A + B test versus a validation qPCR assay for detection of influenza A during a volunteer A/California/2009/H1N1 challenge study. Virol J. (2021) 18:45. doi: 10.1186/s12985-021-01516-0, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 5. Sharma K, Aminian M, Ghosh T, Liu X, Kirby M. Using machine learning to determine the time of exposure to infection by a respiratory pathogen. Sci Rep. (2023) 13:5340–0. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-30306-7, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 6. Aminian M, Ghosh T, Peterson A, Rasmussen AL, Stiverson S, Sharma K, et al. Early prognosis of respiratory virus shedding in humans. Sci Rep. (2021) 11:17193. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-95293-z, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 7. Huang Y, Zaas AK, Rao A, Dobigeon N, Woolf PJ, Veldman T, et al. Temporal dynamics of host molecular responses differentiate symptomatic and asymptomatic influenza a infection. PloS Genet. (2011) 7:e1002234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002234, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 8. Jeyananthan P. Prolonged viral shedding prediction on non-hospitalized, uncomplicated SARS-CoV-2 patients using their transcriptome data. Comput Methods Programs BioMed Update. (2022) 2:100070. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpbup.2022.100070, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 9. Pelleau S, Woudenberg T, Rosado J, Donnadieu F, Garcia L, Obadia T, et al. Kinetics of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 antibody response and serological estimation of time since infection. J Infect Dis. (2021) 224:1489–99. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab375, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 10. Simoni Y, Chng MHY, Li S, Fehlings M, Newell EW. Mass cytometry: a powerful tool for dissecting the immune landscape. Curr Opin Immunol. (2018) 51:187–96. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2018.03.023, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 11. Rahil Z, Leylek R, Schürch CM, Chen H, Bjornson-Hooper Z, Christensen SR, et al. Landscape of coordinated immune responses to H1N1 challenge in humans. J Clin Invest. (2020) 130:5800–16. doi: 10.1172/JCI137265, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 12. McIlwain DR, Chen H, Rahil Z, Bidoki NH, Jiang S, Bjornson Z, et al. Human influenza virus challenge identifies cellular correlates of protection for oral vaccination. Cell Host Microbe. (2021) 29:1828–37. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.10.009, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 13. Reeves PM, Sluder AE, Paul SR, Scholzen A, Kashiwagi S, Poznansky MC. Application and utility of mass cytometry in vaccine development. FASEB J. (2018) 32:5–15. doi: 10.1096/fj.201700325r, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 14. Mukherjee R, Eggesbø LM, Wolf AS, Kjønstad IF, Solum G, Ravussin A, et al. Mass cytometry reveals cellular correlates of immune response heterogeneity to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in the elderly. NPJ Vaccines. (2024) 9:238. doi: 10.1038/s41541-024-01028-2, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 15. Hamlin RE, Rahman A, Pak TR, Maringer K, Mena I, Bernal-Rubio D, et al. High-dimensional CyTOF analysis of dengue virus-infected human DCs reveals distinct viral signatures. JCI Insight. (2017) 2:e92424. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.92424, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 16. Kotliar D, Lin AE, Logue J, Hughes TK, Khoury NM, Raju SS, et al. Single-cell profiling of ebola virus disease in vivo reveals viral and host dynamics. Cell. (2020) 183:1383–1401.e19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.002, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 17. Watson JM, Francis JN, Mesens S, Faiman GA, Makin J, Patriarca P, et al. Characterisation of a wild-type influenza (A/H1N1) virus strain as an experimental challenge agent in humans. Virol J. (2015) 12:13. doi: 10.1186/s12985-015-0240-5, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 18. Liebowitz D, Gottlieb K, Kolhatkar NS, Garg SJ, Asher JM, Nazareno J, et al. Efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety of an oral influenza vaccine: a placebo-controlled and active-controlled phase 2 human challenge study. Lancet Infect Dis. (2020) 20:435–44. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(19)30584-5, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 19. Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learning. (2001) 45:5–32. doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324, PMID: 40177105 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 20. Virtanen P, Gommers R, Oliphant TE, Haberland M, Reddy T, Cournapeau D, et al. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nat Methods. (2020) 17:261–72. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 21. Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in python. J Mach Learn Res. (2011) 12:2825–30. [ Google Scholar ] 22. Weinreb C, Wolock S, Tusi BK, Socolovsky M, Klein AM. Fundamental limits on dynamic inference from single-cell snapshots. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. (2018) 115:E2467–76. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1714723115, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 23. Tsang JS, Schwartzberg PL, Kotliarov Y, Biancotto A, Xie Z, Germain RN, et al. Global analyses of human immune variation reveal baseline predictors of postvaccination responses. Cell. (2014) 157:499–513. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.031, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 24. Balasingam S, Wilder-Smith A. Randomized controlled trials for influenza drugs and vaccines: a review of controlled human infection studies. Int J Infect Diseases. (2016) 49:18–29. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2016.05.013, PMID: [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Associated Data This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. Supplementary Materials Supplementary Figure 1 Random forest model classifying virus shedding across studies without baseline normalization. ROC curves evaluating the performance of random forest models built using raw, not-normalized data to classify virus shedders from non-shedders. Lines and AUC values show model performance at the indicated DPCs. (A) Model trained and validated on Study A. (B) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort. Results illustrate reduced overall classification accuracy and generalization compared to baseline-normalized models shown in Figure 3 . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Figure 2 Machine learning–based prediction of time post virus exposure without baseline normalization. (A–D) Random forest models predicting time post virus exposure in virus shedders using raw, not-normalized data. (A, B) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.70, p = 4.19 × 10 −20 , n = 19) with corresponding root mean squared error (rMSE). (C, D) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.57, p = 8.61 × 10 − 8 , n = 16) with rMSE shown. Results illustrate reduced temporal accuracy and generalization compared to baseline-normalized models shown in Figure 4 . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Figure 3 Expected absence of predictive temporal immune trajectories in non-shedders. Random forest models predicting time post virus exposure in non-shedders. (A–D) Models built using baseline-normalized data. (A) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.45, p = 1.26 × 10 −7 , n = 16) with corresponding root mean squared error (rMSE) shown in (B) . (C) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.17, p = 1.93 × 10 − ¹, n = 15) with rMSE shown in (D) . (E–H) Models built using raw, not-normalized data. (E) Leave-one-out cross-validation in Study A (Pearson r = 0.27, p = 2.13 × 10 − ³, n = 16) with rMSE shown in (F) . (G) Model trained on Study A and applied to the independent Study B cohort (Pearson r = 0.01, p = 9.14 × 10 − ¹, n = 15) with rMSE shown in (H) . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Figure 4 Predicted versus actual DPC without baseline normalization. (A, B ) Heatmaps comparing predicted versus actual DPC by subject for Study A (A) and Study B (B) using raw, non-normalized data. Each tile represents the median predicted DPC for a given subject relative to the actual DPC, illustrating reduced temporal accuracy and generalization compared to baseline-normalized models shown in Figure 4 . Presentation1.pdf (581.1KB, pdf) Supplementary Table 1 Mapping of immune cell populations between study A and study B. Columns list cell populations from each study dataset, with corresponding or equivalent subpopulations aligned within the same row. DataSheet1.csv (1.5KB, csv) Supplementary Table 2 Alignment of sampling timepoints between study A and study B. The DPC (days post-challenge) column indicates the unified timepoint alignment used in this study. The Study A and Study B columns list the original study-specific day numbering schemes reported in ( 11 ) and ( 12 ) respectively. For Study A, viral challenge occurred on study day 1 (original numbering) following blood draw sampling. For Study B, viral challenge occurred on study day 90 (original numbering) following blood draw sampling. For both studies, the DPC 1 blood draw corresponds to approximately 24 hours post-challenge. DataSheet2.csv (106B, csv) Supplementary Table 3 Study A immune cell abundance data used for model features. Columns include volunteer identifier (VOLUNTEER), day post-challenge of blood draw (DPC), and virus shedding status (SHEDDER), encoded as 1 for shedders and 0 for non-shedders, for participants in Study A. Remaining columns report the relative abundances of immune cell populations measured by mass cytometry and used as model features. DataSheet3.csv (194.6KB, csv) Supplementary Table 4 Study B immune cell abundance data used for model features. Columns include volunteer identifier (VOLUNTEER), day post-challenge of blood draw (DPC), and virus shedding status (SHEDDER), encoded as 1 for shedders and 0 for non-shedders, for participants in Study B. Remaining columns report the relative abundances of immune cell populations measured by mass cytometry and used as model features. DataSheet4.csv (98.9KB, csv) Data Availability Statement The datasets used for model building in this study are available in Supplementary Tables 3 and 4 . Code used in this study is available from Github ( https://github.com/davemcilwain/Flu-Day-Prediction ). Articles from Frontiers in Immunology are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA ACTIONS View on publisher site PDF (3.0 MB) Cite Collections Permalink PERMALINK Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection * Choose a collection Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Follow NCBI NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) NCBI on Facebook NCBI on LinkedIn NCBI on GitHub NCBI RSS feed Connect with NLM NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) NLM on Facebook NLM on YouTube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov Back to Top window.ncbi = window.ncbi || {}; window.ncbi.pmc = window.ncbi.pmc || {}; window.ncbi.pmc.options = { logLevel: 'INFO', staticEndpoint: 'https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/pd-medc-pmc-cloudpmc-viewer/production/9b1d9d87/var/data/static/', citeCookieName: 'pmc-cf', }; &#xA0; jQuery.getScript("https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/alerts/alerts.js", function () { galert(['div.nav_and_browser', 'div.header', '#universal_header', '.usa-banner', 'body > *:nth-child(1)']) }); var exports = {};